## Lab 2 - QuickStart - OpenAI

- In this exercise you will create a simple Spring Boot application which can make calls to OpenAI.  You will need to establish credentials with OpenAI first, so let's take care of that now.

---
**Part 1 - Signup Process for OpenAI**

NOTE:  The AI industry changes rapidly.  The instructions here were valid as of June 2024.  You may find the screens and terminology have updated since these instructions were recorded.

1. Go to https://platform.openai.com/signup
Login or signup for an account.  We recommend the signup option using Google, Microsoft, Apple, etc. 
2. This will take you to an initial page welcoming you to the OpenAI Developer Platform.  Once here you can create API Keys at https://platform.openai.com/api-keys.
3. Create a new secret key.  Either type of secret key will work, but the “service account” option is more appropriate.  Make a service account ID such as "svc-account-one".  For the project, you should already see a default project associated with your default organization.
4. Create secret key.  COPY the generated key value. 
5. Set an environment variable named `SPRING_AI_OPENAI_API_KEY` using this value.  On Windows you can run: 
```
setx SPRING_AI_OPENAI_API_KEY "YOUR-KEY-GOES-HERE"
```
On Linux or Mac you can run:
```
export SPRING_AI_OPENAI_API_KEY="YOUR-KEY-GOES-HERE"
```
* While the spring.ai.openai.api-key value can be set in application.properties or application.yml, you run the risk of exposing your key should your commit your work to a public source repository.  For this reason, usage of the environment variable is recommened.
* If you loose this key, don't worry.  You can easily create a new one if needed.
* Note: You may have to establish a payment method if you have exhausted your free tier.  This can happen if you use ChatGPT frequently - like we do.  The labs in this course should cost less than $5.
* Restart your IDE to ensure that the value is picked up.

---
**Part 2 - Generate the Project Structure**

5.  Using [https://start.spring.io](https://start.spring.io), create a new Spring Boot Project.
  - Use either Maven or Gradle - Groovy (if you have it installed).  All lab instructions are based on Maven.
  - Use the latest stable releases of Boot and Java.  These instructions were originally tested with Java 1.21, Boot 3.2.5.  The version can be changed after the project is generated.
  - Use JAR packaging.
  - For project metadata, adjust the values as you like.  These instructions will assume an artifact and name of “lab2-openai”.
  - Adjust the package to `com.example` for simplicity.  Feel free to re-arrange the package structure later, but the remaining instructions will assume the former.
  - Search for and select the `OpenAI` dependency. (Do **NOT** select the Azure OpenAI for this lab!)
6. Generate.  Find the downloaded zip and expand it.  Copy the `lab2-openai` project to wherever you downloaded your labfiles to.
---
**Part 3 - Import into your IDE**

The project structure generated by Spring Initializr follows a Maven-type generic pattern and can be imported into various IDEs. You can use either VS Code (assuming the appropriate extensions are installed, see "Lab Setup"), IntelliJ, or Eclipse. 

The instructions below are for VS Code. If you wish to use IntilliJ or Eclipse and need assistance, see the "Lab Setup" document.

7. Open VS Code.

8. Open the project folder by using the File menu and select "Open Folder". Select the folder where you copied the files.
* Give VS Code a moment to initialize its workspace, especially if this is the first time importing a Gradle/Maven project.
* If you see a message about enabling null analysis for the project, you can select either enable or disable.
* If you see a message about installing _Extension Pack for Java_, take the install option.
* If you see a message _Do you trust the authors of the files in this folder_, check the checkbox and click the "trust" button..

9. ***VS Code should*** recognize the project as a Maven or Gradle project and automatically import it. If it does not and you are using Gradle, you may need to manually import it:

* Open the Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P or Cmd+Shift+P on macOS).
* Type "Gradle: Import Gradle Project" and select it.
* Navigate to the project directory and select the build.gradle file.
* Click "Open".

10. If you get an error such as “invalid source release ” you may need to lower the Java version specified in your build.gradle file. 

* Open build.gradle
* Find the section on java / sourceCompatibility.
* Lower the Java version number. For example, if 21 is too high, try 17.

The project should be free of compiler errors at this point.  Address any issues you see before continuing.

---
**Part 4 - Setup keys and test**

At this point, let's take a moment to ensure that everything we have created so far is error free.

11.  Within your IDE, find the `src/main/resources/application.properties`.  Rename this file as `src/main/resources/application.yml`.
12.  Establish the following entries:
```
spring:
  application.name: Lab2 OpenAI
  main.web-application-type: none     # Do not start a web server.

  ai:
    openai:
      api-key: NEVER-PLACE-SECRET-KEY-IN-CONFIG-FILE
    retry:
      max-attempts: 1           # Maximum number of retry attempts.
      on-client-errors: false   # If false, throw a NonTransientAiException, and do not attempt retry for 4xx client error codes.
```
- Note: The "NEVER-PLACE..." entry is present just to warn you against copying your private key value into this file.
- Note: The retry* settings will override the `ChatClient`'s default settings.  You are likely to experience errors while you learn the API's usage, and we don't want you to experience unnecessary expenses.
13.  Save your work.  

14.  Find the main application class in `src/main/java/com/example`.  It is probably named `Lab2OpenaiApplication.java` if you have followed theses instructions (We usually rename ours to `Application.java`). Run the application.
* **VS Code**: Right-click, Run Java.  Or open the file and click the “Run” option hovering over the main() method.
* **IntelliJ**: Right-click, select “Run ‘Application.main()’”. 
* **Eclipse**: Right-click, Select Run As / Java Application.

* We expect the application to start.  If you have any errors related to tooling, be sure to address them now before proceeding.

15.  Stop the application.
* **VS Code**: In the “TERMINAL” tab type “ctrl-c”, or press the trashcan icon.
* **IntelliJ**: Stop the application by clicking on the red “stop” button on the left edge of the console tab.
* **Eclipse**: Stop the application by clicking on the red “terminate” button on the console tab.
---
**Part 5 - Try Spring AI's `ChatClient`**

At this point we should be able to try using the ChatClient to make API calls to OpenAI.

16. Create a new "client" folder under `src/main/java/com/example`.
17. Within this package create a new Java file called `OpenAIClient.java`.
* The IDE should create an empty Java class definition for you.
18. Add the following annotations at the class level to make this object a Spring Bean and to only activate it when the "openai" profile is active:
```
@Component
@Profile("openai")
public class OpenAIClient {
``` 
- Note: the `@Profile` annotation we be useful later when we want our application to call different models.
19. Add code to automatically provide a reference to the `ChatClient`.  Spring Boot automatically creates this when the Spring AI dependencies are on the classpath:
```
	@Autowired
	ChatClient chatClient;
```
20. Add a `callModel` method.  Define two String parameters for the prompt and model to use.  
```
    public String callModel(String prompt, String model ) {

        if (model==null) {
            model = "gpt-3.5-turbo";
        }

		ChatResponse response = chatClient.call(
			new Prompt(prompt,
            	OpenAiChatOptions.builder()
					.withModel(model)
                    .withTemperature(0.4f)
					.build()
				));

        return response.getResults().get(0).getOutput().getContent();
    }

```
- If model is null, replace it with a default value. 
- Use the `chatClient` to call the API.  Pass the given prompt as well as an `Options` object defining the model and temperature.
- The `ChatResponse` is a bit complex.  For this simple example we expect it to contain a single `Generation` object containing an `AssistantMessage` object.  Within this object we will find a JSON object containing our desired response.
21. Supply any imports needed to make you code compile.
* **VS Code**: Type Alt-Shift-O.
* **IntelliJ**: Type Ctrl-Alt-O.
* **Eclipse**: Type Ctrl-Shift-O.
22. Save your work.

**Part 6 - Create a `@Test` class**

Anything we code, we should test.  We will make a `@Test` class to ensure our Client object works as expected.

23. Create a new Java file test class in src/test/java/com/example.  Name the class `OpenAIClientTests.java`.

24. Alter the test class to include the `@SpringBootTest` annotation. Tell boot to run as a non-web application and 'openai' profile active like this:
```
@SpringBootTest(webEnvironment = SpringBootTest.WebEnvironment.NONE)
@ActiveProfiles("openai")
public class OpenAIClientTests {
    //...
```	
25. Add code to automatically provide a reference to the `OpenAIClient`:
```
    @Autowired 
	OpenAIClient openAIClient;
```
Add a `@Test` method to use the `openAIClient` to make an example API call:
```
	@Test
	void quickChat() {

        String response = 
            openAIClient.callModel(
                "Generate the names of the five great lakes.  Produce JSON output.",
                "gpt-3.5-turbo");

		Assertions.assertThat(response).isNotNull();

		//	Print the results
		System.out.println("The results of the call are: " + response);
    }
```
26. Supply any imports needed to make you code compile.
* **VS Code**: Type Alt-Shift-O.
* **IntelliJ**: Type Ctrl-Alt-O.
* **Eclipse**: Type Ctrl-Shift-O.

27.  Save your work. Run the test.
* **VS Code**: In the "explorer" view on the left, Right-click on the class, Select "Run Tests".  Or, find the green triangle in the editor’s “gutter”. Click on this to run either an individual test method or all tests in the class.
* **IntelliJ**: Right-click on the class. Select Run OpenAIClientTests.
* **Eclipse**: Right-click on the class. Select Run As / Junit Test.

The test should run and produce a list of the five Great Lakes.  It is also very possible that you will encounter an error here, possibly due to setup, but also due to changes in OpenAPI since the time of this writing.  Here are some troubleshooting tips.
* If you have a compilation issue, be sure you have organized imports.  Compare your code to the solution code.
* If you receive a message that your token is invalid, be sure that your environment variable is being picked up.  Restart your IDE to check. Return to the earlier steps to create a token and set it in an environment variable.
* If you receive a message about exceeding your quota, you may need to convert to a paid subscription for OpenAI (We've had to do this, since we use it heavily).

**Part 7 - Summary**
At this point, you have integrated with one of OpenAI's models to make use of AI from your own Spring Boot application.  Congratulations! 